# Derivation of the Laplace Equation in Two Dimensions

The heat equation in two dimensions is $$\frac{\partial u}{\partial t}=\sigma\left(\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial x^2}+\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial y^2}\right)$$We assume that the sheet is thin enough to neglect the third dimension $z$, and that heat exchange with the environment can only happen at the edges. If the boundary conditions at the edges don't change with time then eventually the heat will diffuse until an equilibrium heat is reached. At that point, temperature won't depend on time anymore, so the equation simplifies to $$\left(\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial x^2}+\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial y^2}\right)=0$$Other common notations for the Laplace equation are $\Delta u=0$ and $\nabla^2u=0$. We can expect the solutions to be smooth as diffusion is a smoothing process.

The two-dimensional Laplace equation will have boundary conditions on the edges of the rectangular domain $0<x<a,~ 0<y<b$. We can have Dirichlet boundary conditions $$\begin{align}u(0,y)=f(y) \\ u(a,y)=g(y) \\ u(x,0)=h(x) \\ u(x,b)=l(x)\end{align}$$which specify the temperature on the boundaries. Neumann type boundary conditions would be $$\begin{align}u_x(0,y)=f(y) \\ u_x(a,y)=g(y) \\ u_y(x,0)=h(x) \\ u_y(x,b)=l(x)\end{align}$$which specify the value of the gradient orthogonal to the boundary.
# Divide and Conquer

To solve this, we can introduce four new functions $u_1(x,y),~u_2(x,y),~u_3(x,y),~u_4(x,y)$ that each satisfy one nonhomogeneous boundary condition and the homogeneous versions of the other three boundaries. Then the solution we're looking four is the sum of the four new functions.

We use separation of variables to make the differential equation $$X''(x)Y(y)+X(x)Y''(y)=0$$then we can separate the variables and set them equal to a constant whose sign we decide on later$$\frac{X''}{X}=-\frac{Y''}{Y}=\pm\lambda$$To solve one of the new functions, we consider its three homogeneous boundary conditions in terms of the separated functions, then we're left with two eigenvalue problems, one with two boundary conditions and the other with only one. We first solve for the variable with two boundary conditions to get $$\lambda_n=\frac{n^2\pi^2}{b^2}\text{ (solving for Y) or} \frac{n^2\pi^2}{a^2}\text{ (solving for X)}$$with corresponding eigenfunctions $$Y_n(y)=\sin(\sqrt{\lambda_n}y)\text{ or }X_n(x)=\sin(\sqrt{\lambda_n}x)$$which we can substitute into the problem for the other variable. The general solution for that can be expressed in terms of hyperbolic sines and cosines. Recall that $$\cosh(x)=\frac{e^x+e^{-x}}{2},~\sinh(x)=\frac{e^x-e^{-x}}{2}$$so the general solution can be expressed as $$X_n(x)=A_n\cosh(\tfrac{n\pi x}{b})+B_n\sinh(\tfrac{n\pi x}{b})$$or $$Y_n(y)=A_n\cosh(\tfrac{n\pi y}{a})+B_n\sinh(\tfrac{n\pi y}{a})$$depending on which variable we're solving for. The final homogeneous boundary condition will give us one of the two coefficients in terms of the other one, so we can rewrite and multiply the separated variable by the other one to get the general solution after superposition. Finally, we can solve for the coefficients using the nonhomogeneous boundary condition, which turns the equation into a Fourier sine series.