An operating system is a program that interfaces hardware and user software, giving the latter tools it can use to uniformly interact with the hardware given the OS can be installed on that hardware. There are many different ways to do that, each with their own quicks, so we have a defined standard (currently many standards) called POSIX (portable operating systems interface) that an OS must implement to be POSIX compatible. However, most OSes won't be completely POSIX compatible due to a variety of reasons.

In an OS, there are two spaces: kernel space, a power operating mode with no restrictions and the capability to destroy your machine, and user space, the normal operating mode where most applications run. When a user space program needs the power of the kernel, they can use a system call, adding a layer of security to the program. The laptops we use use single machine multiple user operating systems, with a single central clock and standard hardware.

The OS is made of many different pieces, but the most important one is the kernel, which deals with several tasks, including booting. First, the computer hardware executes firmware from read-only memory, which executes a bootloader (an interface between the firmware and OS), which loads the OS kernels that execute `init` and create the rest of the system from nothing, then executes startup scripts like starting USB handling and networking, then executes user-side scripts like starting the desktop.

The kernel gives the following services to programs in user space: scheduling processes and threads, handling synchronization primitives, system calls like `read` and `write`, managing virtual memory, filesystems, handling inter-process and network communication, linking libraries, and more. It creates the first process `init.d` (or `system.d`) which boots up terminals, GUIs, and more, and is the only process explicitly created by the system. All others are instantiated using the system calls `fork` and `exec`.