Since Indian cinematic production began in 1899, every attempt to control popular cinema, both by the British and their postcolonial successors, has failed. **Popular** (made for an audience, mass appeal) Hindi cinema has thrived through political and economic turbulence and the aesthetic and technical competition of Hollywood and other international film industries and Indian **art house** (made for oneself, pure artistic expression) films. While named much later, the cinematic event known as Bollywood is a repeat of past reactions to disruptions in the Indian media, market, and governance. These notes will deal with four such moments of disruption to trace and analyze the history of Bollywood in order to arrive at its meaning.

Bollywood becoming a global phenomenon was a recent event not just because of the complex postcolonial history but also because of the complex Indian film industry that contains multiple layers and languages. It wasn't until the introduction of sound to Indian films in 1931 that the national output began steadily increasing, and by 1971 India was the largest national film producer in the world despite being primarily or national consumption. Because of the huge diversity in languages, each state made films in that state's language except for Maharashtra, which produced Hindi as well as Marathi cinema. This made Hindi cinema the only cinema distributed nationally. During the Cold War, Indian art cinema usually was sent to European and American film festivals, while popular films were exported to the USSR and parts of Asia and Africa. After that, popular films and Bollywood became the dominant form of Indian cinema in the West. More specifically, this happened in 2002 with the Cannes premiere of Sanjay Leela Bhansali's *Devdas*. Sony Pictures was the first Hollywood studio to finance a Bollywood film directed by Bhansali (*Saawariya*) in 2007.

Bollywood's debut on the modern-day global media market enabled massive successes such as the Telugu two-part film *Baahubali* (2015-17) with gross sales exceeding INR 8 billion including Tamil and Hindi dub. In 2017, the Indian cinema output reached a high of 1,986 films in 43 languages. That dipped slightly in early 2018, but rose to 2,446 films in 55 languages in early 2019, consistently equaling the sum of the second and third largest film producers, China and the United States. Since India became the highest film producing nation in 1971, the linguistic diversity of Indian cinema has been unmatched despite the numerous attempts to control the industry due to several discrete moments that protected it.

The four moments discussed in these notes are: the almost accidental triumph of Indian talkies over Hollywood and other imported films in the 1930s; the emergence of the social melodrama with nationalist undertones; the integration of the voices of the oppressed in the action genre, centered on the "angry young male"; and the discovery of the global neoliberal, self-consciously "Indian" aesthetic that gave rise to Bollywood. Each of these shifts are well-documented and acknowledged in government and the media, and these notes use them to structure and explain the development and purpose of popular Indian cinema, from its beginnings to Bollywood, exposing its history of contradictions.