Until 1931, indigenous cinema in British India had an uncertain future, being restricted and impoverished by colonial rule, but became a viable entity after the advent of sound technology. As sound film production grew, the percentage of imported films from Hollywood significantly decreased due to several factors, including but not limited to the innovative and hybrid musical form of the films, a cause that is consistently overemphasized by official and popular histories.

When sound technology was introduced to cinema in 1927, Hollywood dominated the market within Britain and throughout the British Empire. To deal with this, the **Quota Act (1927)** was passed for the British domestic market, which pushed for a hypothetical category of films called *empire cinema* that would push colonial labor and resources into British filmmaking, to be marketed in the colonies as Hollywood's competition. Despite this, all that actually happened was a committee studying the market for empire cinema. At that point, Hollywood had almost an 80 percent market share, but due to the Great Depression in 1929 and the increasing popularity of cinema in India, 40 percent of films shown in India in 1936 were now Indian.

Therefore, the problem of making films with important technology in a colonial economy while competing against Hollywood was miraculously overcome. The colonized population not allowed to make salt without paying Britain only managed to achieve such a feat due to the disorganized and diverse world of Indian silent cinema produced between 1913 and 1930, after which a hybrid cinema with hybrid music emerged in each of the three Indian port towns / metropolises (Bombay, Calcutta, Madras). a byproduct of cultural modernity and the progenitor of a national modernity.

It's impossible to trace that hybridity due to the utter lack of available films, secondary discussion being the only way to access the works of pioneers like Baburao Painter and Dhirendra Nath Ganguly. This also served as a detriment to the growth of an organic cinematic tradition during the transition to sound, forcing cinema to take "its entire form from the urban theatre," according to Shyam Benegal.

What Benegal critiqued has been the triumphal narrative in nationalist histories of Indian cinemas, ignoring the modernity and hybridity of early cinema and painting Indian cinema's trajectory as linear, taking D. G. Phalke's idea of "swadeshi cinema" literally instead of as the business strategy Phalke himself intended it to mean. This linear growth wasn't possible even in the era of Indian nationalism due to the gap between the art form and mechanical production. Calling the movement swadeshi also may not be viable.

The "swadeshi idea" was widely used as a marketing tool after the eponymous 1903-08 movement and was not the reason Indian cinema became a battleground for cultural and economic interests. The majority of the viewing public was **subaltern** (the opposite of bourgeois) and was meant to be both manipulated and feared. The 1928 *Report of the Indian Cinematograph Committee* documents the bourgeois anxiety of the subaltern gaze and the melodramatic Indian cinematic form of the 1930s, despite being less hybrid and more stylized, provided a cinema that could hold entertain both economic groups through "culture", beating out Hollywood.

The first shift that these notes discusses highlights the heterogeneity of the social environments surrounding the studios of Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras, producing various melodramatic subgenres through the 1930s and early 40s. A generation of stars was nurtured and became the most important people in the industry after World War II's economic unrest caused an illegal influx of funding into the film industry, replacing the studio system with a star-centric system of production. The popularities of cinema and film songs buoyed each other through World War II and Partition, the inherent hybridity in colonial cinema, like the **non-diegetic** (unrelated to the story) songs played throughout, being naturalized as "Indianness". 