# Undamped Mass-Spring Systems

Mechanical systems are governed by Newton's law, so simple systems have second order governing equations as acceleration is the second derivative of the position. The force in an undamped mass-spring system is provided by **Hooke's law**, which says that its proportional to the displacement, yielding the following differential equation $$mx''+kx=0$$with general solution of the form $$x(t)=A\cos(\omega_0 t)+B\sin(\omega_0 t), \omega_0 = \sqrt{\frac{k}{m}}$$where $\omega_0$ is the natural frequency. When there's an external force $f(t)$, it's often assumed to be a periodic function and modeled as a $\sin(\omega t)$ term as follows $$mx''+kx=\sin(\omega t)$$We can solve this using the method of undetermined coefficients, which gives the general solution $$x(t)=A\cos(\omega_0 t)+B\sin(\omega_0 t)+\frac{\sin(\omega t)}{k-m\omega^2}$$For small $\omega^2$, the solution has positive amplitude as it's in phase with the driver. For large $\omega^2$, it is $\pi$ out of phase with the driver and has negative amplitude. When $\omega$ approaches $\omega_0$ the amplitude of the response becomes large, and is undefined when their absolute values are equal in a phenomenon called **resonance**.

While it looks like it, it's not true that the amplitude is infinite when the forced frequency equals the natural frequency. Since the forcing term is a solution to the homogeneous equation, we need to find a solution of a different form. In this case, we know to check $Ct\sin(t)+Dt\cos(t)$.
# Mass-Spring Systems with Damping

In real physical systems there's usually some form of damping proportional to the velocity of the system to slow the movement of the mass and decrease oscillations, in which case Newton's law becomes $$mx''+\gamma x'+kx=f(t)$$First looking at the homogeneous equation, the characteristic equation has roots $$r=\frac{-\gamma +\sqrt{\gamma^2-4km}}{2m}$$If the roots are complex, the solutions consist of exponentially decaying oscillations and this case is called **underdamped**, as these oscillations are usually unwanted. If the roots are real, then they'll be negative and the solutions consist of decaying exponentials with no oscillations. For distinct roots, it's called **overdamped** and for equal roots, **critically damped** (the ideal case).

Now let's consider the nonhomogeneous damped harmonic oscillator $$mx''+\gamma x'+kx=F_0\sin(\omega t)$$Using the method of undetermined coefficients, we look for a solution of the form $$x=A_1\cos(\omega t)+A_2\sin(\omega t)$$and solving for the coefficients yields $$\begin{aligned}((k-m\omega^2)^2+\gamma^2\omega^2)A_1=-F_0\gamma\omega \\ ((k-m\omega^2)^2+\gamma^2\omega^2)A_2=F_0(k-m\omega^2)\end{aligned}$$Using the angle subtraction formula gives us $$x=A\sin(\omega t-\phi), A=\sqrt{A_1^2+A_2^2}, \phi=\arctan(-A_1/A_2)$$We can think of the mechanical system as transforming the forcing term by changing its amplitude and phase. Solving for $A$ and $\phi$ gives $$\begin{aligned}A=\frac{F_0}{\sqrt{(k-m\omega^2)^2+\gamma^2\omega^2}}\\\phi = \arctan(\frac{\gamma\omega}{k-m\omega^2})\end{aligned}$$There are two different behaviors for the amplitude $A$ depending on whether the damping condition is less than or greater than $\sqrt{2km}$. In the less than case, the amplitude has a local minimum at $\omega = 0$ and a global maximum at $\omega-\pm\sqrt{\frac{2km-\gamma^2}{2m^2}}$. In the greater than case, the curve has a global maximum at $w=0$ and decreases as $|w|$ increases.

For the phase shift $\phi$ curves, its always $\frac\pi 2$ when the forced frequency is equal to the natural frequency, and for low damping the phase is close to zero when the forced frequency is less than the natural and close to $\pi$ when it is greater. This means that for low damping, if the system is driven at frequencies below the natural frequency, then the response will be in phase, and if it's driven at frequencies above the natural frequency, the response will be $\pi$ out of phase with the forcing.