# RC Circuits

For a simple circuit consisting of a resistor and capacitor in series with a battery and a switch, the sum of the voltage drops over both components must equal the voltage supplied by the battery. Differentiating the voltage equations $$V_R=IR, V_C=\frac{1}{C}\int_0^tI(s)ds$$we create the differential equation $$R\frac{dI}{dt}+\frac{1}{C}I=0, I(0)=\frac{V_0}{R}$$for resistance $R$, capacitance $C$, and current $I(t)$. We can solve this to obtain $$I(t)=\frac{V_0}{R}e^{-\frac{t}{RC}}$$from which the other quantities can be derived. Note that a resistance $R$ times a capacitance $C$ equals time in seconds, called the $RC$ time constant.

The problem becomes more instant when the current is alternating and not direct, so the voltage sinusoidally varies, giving us the equation $$R\frac{dI}{dt}+\frac{1}{C}I=V_0\omega\cos(\omega t)$$We can solve this using the method of undetermined coefficients to find the solution $$I_p(t)=\frac{V_0RC^2\omega^2}{(\omega RC)^2+1}\sin(\omega t)+\frac{V_0\omega C}{(\omega RC)^2+1}\cos(\omega t)$$We can assume that, since the homogeneous solution is exponentially decaying, that we're at a time where it is negligible. We can find any other quantity of interest from here.
# RLC Circuits, Complex Numbers, and Phasors

We can add one more mathematically interesting component called an **inductor**, a coil of conducting wire. The voltage drop across an inductor is proportional (with constant $L$, the inductance measured in Henrys) to the rate of change of the current through it, and creates the second order differential equation $$L\frac{d^2I}{dt^2}+R\frac{dI}{dt}+\frac{1}{C}I=-V_0\omega\sin(\omega t)$$All the derivation done in the mechanical oscillation section translates directly to this equation, so there's no need to repeat the calculations. Instead, we can recall the Euler formula converts complex exponentials to real trigonometric functions. Since the equations are linear, we can substitute the real voltage with a complex voltage $$\bar V(t)=V_0e^{i\omega t}$$and take the real part of the complex current $\bar I(t)$. We look for a solution in the form $\bar I(t)=I_0e^{i\omega t}$, and substituting into the $RC$ equation gives $$(i\omega R+\frac{1}{C})I_0e^{i\omega t}=i\omega V_0e^{i\omega t}$$which implies $$I_0=V_0\frac{R+\frac{i}{\omega C}}{R^2+\frac{1}{\omega^2C^2}}$$This is reminiscent of Ohm's law, and in fact we have $$V_0=\left(R-\frac{i}{\omega C}\right)I_0$$so it looks exactly like Ohm's law except with a complex resistance called **impedance**. If the capacitance is large, the imaginary part is small and this is exactly the usual Ohm's law.

Recall that complex numbers can be identified with points on a circle, and that multiplying them adds the angles. Since impedance lies in the fourth quadrant, the voltage always lags behind the current between $0$ and $\frac\pi2$. If the resistance is zero, then the voltage is exactly behind by $\frac\pi2$, and if the capacitance is large then the voltage and current are in phase.

Considering an $LR$ circuit with the same sinusoidal voltage, our differential equation is $$L\frac{d^2\bar I}{dt^2}+R\frac{d\bar I}{dt}=i\omega V_0e^{i\omega t}$$and looking for a solution of the same form as before we find $$I_0=\frac{V_0}{R+i\omega L} \text{ or } V_0=(R+i\omega L)I_0$$Since impedance lies in the first quadrant, this equation implies the voltage leads the current.

Of course, any real circuit will have inductance, resistance, and capacitance, in which case we have $$L\frac{d^2\bar I}{dt^2}+R\frac{d\bar I}{dt}+\frac{1}{C}\bar I=i\omega V_0e^{i\omega t}$$and going through the same process as before we find that $$V_0=I_0\left(R+i\left(\omega L-\frac{1}{\omega C}\right)\right)$$which means that the impedance could either be in the fourth or the first quadrant, depending on the frequency, inductance, and capacitance.

The relative phase between the voltage and current in an AC system is related to the "power factor", and it's undesirable to have an extremely large angle between the two, as power is a function of the cosine of that angle.