The first four decades of the twentieth century saw two major transformations in cinema. First, America become a global presence in the film industry, replacing France in a campaign bolstered by World War I to capitalize on cinema's universal appeal. By 1916, New York replaced London as the global film export hub, and by 1921 American films held a majority share in every market except Germany's. The second transformation was around 1930, when sound film production first exceeded silent film production worldwide. This checked Hollywood's dominance by forcing them to recognize and accommodate the linguistic diversity of its global viewers. Between 1929 and 1934, various film import quotas and the rising cost of dubbing led to a sharp decline in Hollywood's foreign market. This half-decade was enough for major film-producing nations in Europe to start battling for control of their domestic market.

Outside Europe, only India and Japan took back control of their film markets, having developed their affinity for movies through used films routed through Europe. As a colonized territory where every aspect of production and consumption of cinema was controlled by Britain, Indian cinema was only able to overcome due to the half-decade of Hollywood's decline and the advent of the talkie, a form of cinema composed with music, which wrested back 38 percent of the market share from Hollywood by 1937 and over half by 1939. By 1947, India was the third highest film-producing nation, with films in ten languages serving over 80 percent of the population, one of the only countries where Hollywood remained a minority cinema.

Bollywood makes up less than 15 percent of Indian cinema, but is the only domestic film industry with nationwide distribution and currently the best-known thing to come out of India, simply because of the use of non-diegetic songs that never caught the viewer by surprise. That was already taking form in the first Indian talkie, *Alam Ara*, directed by Ardeshir Irani, which was released in March 1931, preceding eleven other films which also had non-diegetic music. **Playback music** (music recorded separately and inserted during editing) was introduced in 1935, making film song recording not just an important subdomain of the film market, but the majority product of the Indian recording industry for the next seven decades.

While the image of an Indian film contains non-diegetic songs, they are by no means necessary and were not an inevitable consequence of being influenced by pre-cinematic theatrical traditions, and they didn't adhere to the rules of film. Before 1935, music and dialogue had to be recorded simultaneously, which led to sequences where the actor suddenly stops what they're doing, bursts into song, then resumes activity, all without changing the shot. After, in the era of playback music, actors would perform various actions while mouthing to the music.

In both cases, the non-diegetic song is absurd to the outsider, but strangely a staple to the regular. After 1935, playback made the non-diegetic songs even more common. Some believed that songs, even non-diegetic ones, can act as a literary device if done right. Also, without affordable music halls or plays for the subaltern, Indian films often acted as a visualized iTunes for the songs loved by the masses.

While France, Germany, and Japan had significant national cinema bodies aided by capitalism, India managed to control its domestic film market while still a colony being controlled by the British imperial state.

Indian cinema had been facing an uphill battle since its advent. Filmmakers integrating the new technology were excluded by colonialism from its manufacturing. The British East India Company created the earliest form of globalization, and cinema was almost exclusively embedded in the flow of ideas and products from Europe into the colonies. In India, there wasn't much room for entrepreneurship or technological experimentation in the economy, but a media that combined art with those two things like cinema rapidly became popular and was perfect for funding, giving Indians another option outside of Hollywood.