The Suez Canal opened in 1869 and with it came manufactured goods as well as the latest technology from Europe to India's two major port cities at that time, Bombay and Calcutta, which were built by the East India Company in the seventeenth century and became the first Indian centers of cinema production. They were India's first modern metropolises, but their colonial origins made their layouts very different from those of London or Paris, combining a variety of Indian cultures into one area while still giving each their own space. Single-screen theaters built between the 1930s and the 1960s tailored their films to the sensibilities of the localities, easily visible in the maps of Bombay and Calcutta from that time. The accelerating flow of technology from the West also increased the consumption of things like photography. Sudhir Mahadevan found that there were all kinds of consumers for it: "elite and poor Europeans, amateur and commercial photographers, and elite and poorer Indians", making photography a pastime ranging from the elite to the commonplace.

Photography studios have existed in India since the 1840s, and the East India Company had officialized the use of photos in its archaeological and topological surveys as early as 1854. However, with the influx of new technologies from the West, instead of replacing the old photography materials and processes, it coexisted with them, catering to a different class of society.

The purchasing power of the colonial Indian middle classes was very limited, photography all but out of reach well after independence. Products like the Kodak camera which exploded in popularity in the West saw limited influence in India, while recyclable small-scale novelties were far more common.

One such novelty was the magic lantern, which projected still images onto a wall or screen, coexisting with the earliest moving projectors all over the world. In Kalyan, a suburb of Bombay, Madhavrao Patwardhan created his own version, Shambharik Kharolika, in 1892, and his sons traveled all over India to display depictions of narratives from the epics. Patwardhan used three separate projectors, one for the background and two for the foreground, to turn his still images into shows.

The rolling movement of a scroll mounted on a wall or behind two poles had existed in India as early as the seventeenth century, and was an example of pre-technological **frontality**, a phenomenon where the characters in the work are depicted as facing the viewer, flattening out the space to present the story in two dimensions. The majority of the scroll-based shows were based on tales from the Ramayana and Mahabharata, or from the Puranas, and early Indian cinema depended on all three and also exhibited frontality as a result. The Indian pre-cinematic experience of frontality led seamlessly to the pronounced cinematic frontality, and innovations like the Shambharik Kharolika provided the bridge between scroll paintings and cinema.

The beginning of any history of Indian cinema starts at the arrival of the Lumiere brothers' "Cinematographe" on July 7, 1896, in Watson's Hotel in Bombay, soon followed by many others. By the end of 1896, Calcutta had its own shows and in 1897, Madras became the third Indian city to be visited by the Lumieres' agents.

India was successfully initiated into cinema within the decade, and among all mass-produced and mass-consumed media, the silent moving picture was by far the most successful. The agent of this fast spread was the "traveling cinema", consisting of a screen, a couple technicians, some "junk" films, and maybe a tent. Eusoofally Abdoolally, one of the earliest studio and theater owners, started out with the traveling cinema. Madan Studios, the largest exhibition and production enterprise in the 1920s, employed several traveling cinemas that went all around the subcontinent using any means of transportation possible until their films disintegrated from overuse. Permanent movie theaters, referred to as "picture palaces", catered to urban residents and migrant viewers, only appearing after 1906 with J. F. Madan's Elphinstone Picture Palace in Delhi and Bioscope Hall in Calcutta. Electric Theatre was built on Mount Road in Madras from 1909 to 1910. Their numbers more than doubled every decade, yet traveling cinemas still supplemented them throughout British India.

Packaging the movie camera and the projector into one tool was how the cinematograph spread universally, and with it came the dissemination of cinema and an opportunity for the first generation of cinema enthusiasts to become filmmakers on a global scale. However, like other colonized populations, Indians were exclusively seen as consumers as major European and American entertainment companies started regularly distributing in India around 1907, most films coming from France, then from America, Italy, England, Denmark, and Germany.

Even during the early 1910s, the lack of professional film producers in India and the steep costs of traveling elsewhere to learn meant that Indians had to train themselves by tinkering with the equipment, modifying the settings, and adding accessories they made themselves, just like Patwardhan did with his Shambharik Kharolika. These quick fixes are reminiscent of the Hindi word *jugaad*, which perfectly suits early Indian cinema. While early experimenters had experience with the production of images, they often lacked the ability to create aesthetically pleasing ones, and combined with the regulation of necessary raw materials, Indian cinema grew both within and beyond the bounds of an unequal colonial economy. It lacked a self-defined political stance and cared little for originality.

Some scholars find that early Indian cinema didn't grow linearly but instead could be subdivided into different sociopolitical, cultural, and religious niches which are still relevant and can provide a roadmap to the early viewership of Indian cinema. Sudhir Mahadevan mentioned in his 2015 book that one must remember the differing access that Indians had to film, and Manishita Dass said that cinema undermined the elite media fully accessible only to a minority. These complimentary views reflect the difficulty of understanding the history of Indian cinema.

The overwhelming success of Indian cinema is due to two transformations it underwent before independence: the rise of the studio in the 1920s and its eventual displacement in the 1940s by star-centric production. Each transformation also coincided with vertical and horizontal shifts in the perspectives on popular, public, and mainstream culture. Cinema  is well known for transcending classes to be a truly universal medium, and as the most linguistically diverse country in the world, India provides an excellent example of this.  This cultural change was distinct from the vertically descending Indian colonial nationalism. The Indianness of Indian cinema is due to its resonance with the idea of uniting the subaltern classes with intellectuals through culture, and at the center of the multifocal burst of cinema was "the cultural leadership of the young".