Early Indian experiments with the movie camera featured diverse interests and styles, like Hiralal Sen from Calcutta, who preferred to shoot indoors and filmed plays staged in Calcutta commercial theaters. His first short, *Dancing Flowers from the Flowers of Persia*, was screened in 1998. Harishchandra Sakharam Bhatavdekar briefly became the Lumieres' agent after watching their Bombay show until he obtained his own camera, and filmed the "first Indian newsreel", *Return of Paranjpye*, in 1901. Most of his work was shot outdoors, like the Delhi coronation of Edward VII in 1903.

F. B. Thanawala was another pioneer who named his show "Grand Kinetoscope" and exhibited primarily his own films and *Splendid News of Bombay* reels. Jyotish Sarkar filmed the anti-Bengal partition protest rallies and was recruited by the 1905 J. F. Madan's Elphinstone Company. Outside of Bombay and Calcutta, there's very little information on early movie camera uses and only recently did S. Theodore Baskaran compile *History through the Lens*, focusing primarily on the Madras Presidency and describing several examples of early filmed events. According to him, the 1921 Mapla Rebellion and the 1931 Salt March were two events filmed by the British to try and sway public sentiment.

Most silent films had already disappeared before the 1960s National Film Archives, and even though the censor boards kept records of every film since 1920, we still have very little on films before then. This makes us dependent on the nationalist history crediting Dhundiraj Govind Phalke as the "creator" of the Indian film industry with his 1913 film, *King Harishchandra*, as he claimed to the 1927 Indian Cinematograph Committee. Only recently has Ram Chandra Gopal Torney's 1912 *Pundalik* been cited as the first indian feature film, so the mythology surrounding Phalke hasn't been affected. Conveniently, Phalke was born to an educated Brahmin family, was a semiprofessional magician (inviting comparisons to Georges Melies), and trained in photography at Kalabhavan in Baroda afer studying drawing at the J. J. School of Arts. He was a member of the upper-caste bourgeois with just enough privilege and curiosity.

The story begins as such: in 1910, Phalke was unhappy after his photography business went south, and wandered into the America-India Cinema. Seeing his first movie, *The Life of Christ*, gave him a dream of making a movie in India with Indian characters based on an Indian subject, which he had been uniquely training for his whole life without even knowing. His friends weren't as faithful, but he convinced them with his first short simulation, *The Birth of a Pea Plant*. He secured a loan for training and equipment, went to England in February 1912 to learn from Cecil Hepworth, then returned with a camera, film perforator, processing and printing machines, and enough raw stock to start production. His wife, Saraswati "Kaki" Phalke, who he brought to rewatch *The Life of Christ*, pawned her jewelry to raise funds. Phalke recruited actors, technicians, and workers, set up his studio in Bombay's Dadar Main Road, and developed most of the film in the kitchen with Saraswati's help. On April 21, one year later, *Raja Harishchandra* opened at Bombay's Olympic Cinema and then was exhibited at Coronation Cinema with Hindi and English titles.

*Raja Harishchandra* integrated several styles, from Raja Ravi Varma's paintings to trick film conventions to show the protagonist Harishchandra, a king from the *Mahabharata*, lose his kingdom, get tested to their limits by the gods, then have everything restored at the end. Babli Sinha viewed Phalke's use of frontality as promoting *darshan*, seeing and being seen by the divine, allowing viewers to have physical visual contact with the characters on screen and eliminating the distance bewteen them.

The bourgeois and the British Indian press largely ignored Phalke's film, but it was otherwise successful enough to allow him to build a studio in Nasik complete with everything he'd need to create filsm such as *Bhasmasur Mohini* (1913), *Lanka Dahan* (1917), and *Satyavan Savitri* (1914). In 1917, his enterprise was absorbed into Hindustan Film Company, where he joined five other partners and continued making films, including documentaries on the process of filmmaking, exclusively focusing on his own work and ignoring the rest of Indian cinema. Apart from those, he remained limited to a couple myths from the Puranas. Better stunt films from Hollywood and social narratives from the new Bombay and Calcutta studios meant that Phalke's career would be coming to an end soon. His last silent film was *Sethu Bandhan* (1932), and at 64, he made his first talkie and last film, *Gangavataran*, for Kolhapure Cinetone. His success totaled barely fifteen years and he spent the end of his life in poverty, all but forgotten.

His short-lived success is diametrically opposed to the nationalist picture of him as a legend, and recently historians like Someswar Bhowmik project him as "more an astute schemer than anything else", having simply been in the right place at the right time while being equipped with knowledge from his previous education and being a Brahmin and also understanding that the filmmaker's role was the mediator facilitating darshan. His choice was vindicated by the ordinary masses, but the educated took little interest in him, his only real significance being the mythological genre dominating silent films for the next decade. Whether or not that was caused by him is unknown, as the mythology surrounding D. G. Phalke was created mostly by himself.

Sumita S. Chakravarty saw Phalke's promotion of the mythological genre as a decolonizing gesture, as colonialism denigrated Hindu culture, including myths, as effeminate, yet he returned meaning to it. Decades before that, Phalke's legendary status was already sealed with the government's Phalke Award, instituted in 1969, as well as several films based on his life and the choosing of 1913 as the Indian film industry's year of creation.

Phalke's idea of Indians creating for Indians was neither novel nor subversive, as *swadeshi*, a concept meaning indigenous, had been a movement since Bengal in 1903, working against the proposed Bengal partition. *Swadeshi* turned into a catchphrase for businesses to assert themselves over British-controlled enterprises, and Phalke used it aggressively.

Ranita Chatterjee and Rosie Thomas proposed that Hiralal Sen's *Alibaba and the Forty Thieves* (1903) may have been the first Indian feature film, as a 1917 report from the *Times of India* citing J. F. Madan as the first Indian ever to make the film clearly displays Phalke's achievement to not be as well known as he claimed. His mythology was legitimized probably because the first feature film being based on the *Mahabharata* had better optics than it being a fantasy based on *The Thousand and One Nights*. Whatever the reason, Phalke couldn't have succeeded without his skillful execution.

However, not everyone needed the *swadeshi* catchphrase. The first business empire in the history of Indian cinema, Madan Theatres Limited aggressively tested out new markets and demands, willing to supply the choice of the best and the most. J. F. Madan, the founder, was an importer of food and pharmaceutical products and a dealer in insurance and real estate who was quick to enter the movie production and exhibition industry. His first venture was a 1902 Calcutta "bioscope", and he acquired the rights to distribute foreign films and equipment on a massive scale, becoming one of the first cinema chains in the world, spreading all over India, Burma, and Ceylon. Madan also set up his company to indigenously produce local films, mostly recordings of plays. The first original Madan film, *Bilwamangal* (1919), is the first known feature produced in Calcutta. Madan recruited foreign technicians and actors for *Nala and Damayanti* (1920), and the sheer scale of his control over the film industry's chain of supply was called a threat to the free market in the 1921 Evans Report. At the height of its power, Madan Theatres held sway over every trend in the business, importing the first international talkie to India and produced several short talkies before Imperial Studios in Bombay beat him to the release of the first full-length talkie in March 1931.

This dominance ended abruptly when Madan Theatres dissipated beyond redemption in the 1930s, and Calcutta became dominated by B. N. Sircar's New Theatres Studios shortly after. Madan made most of his money from American imports, and after his death, the negotiations between his son and Universal Studios for the sale of the business was thwarted by the Great Depression. Madan was spread too thin, and many criticized him for regularly using international actors, calling his films made in Bengal instead of Bengali films. Of all the regional cinemas, Bengali cinema drew the most from its own culture and literature, especially after Sisir Bhaduri directed a successful film based on *Andhare Alo*, a 1922 novel by Saratchandra Chattopadhyay.

Madan's empire was integral to the history of early Indian cinema, but while he could control the chain of supply and turn it into commercial success, the innovators who actually contributed to film through artistic engagement were Dhirendra Nath Ganguly and Baburao Painter. Ganguly, often referred to as D.G., was trained at Rabindranath Tagore's University at Santiniketan, and began teaching at the Nizam's College in Hyderabad after his graduation. He also continued to train himself in photo production, publishing *Bhaber Abhibyakti* in 1915, a collection of collages of selfies. He sent a copy to Madan, who offered him a job in filmmaking. However, Ganguly decided to work with the newly formed Indo-British Company instead, for which he directed and starred in his first film, *Bilet Ferat* (1921). He was a talented impersonator and went on to collaborate with various other studios, like Dominion Films, appearing in and working on many Calcutta productions and, in 1929, cofounded the British Dominion Film Studio with P. C. Barua.

Baburao Krishnarao Mestri, called Painter because of his skill with the craft, also had a gift for technology, redesigning old cameras and devising tinted filters. He founded the Maharashtra Film Company in Kolhapur in 1917 and directed several films in the mythological and historical genres before making one of the best-known social films of the time, *Savkari Pash* (1925), detailing the life of a peasant whose land was stolen by the oppressive moneylending system, eventually becoming a laborer. Painter's film captivated audiences with a poetic realism unseen in Indian cinema until then. He also created film posters. J. B. H. Wadia, the founder of Wadia Movietone, would later recall the experience of watching the sound version of *Savkari Pash*, and Sarojini Naidu, a poet who would become the first female governor in independent India, called it remarkable and a more eloquent plea than a hundred speeches.

Very few films by Ganguly and Painter still survive, the rest only existing as reviews and writings about them, and neither had any immediate artistic legacy despite their proteges and peers who went on to make films. Their experimentation with film technologies would be largely forgotten until the 1960s Pune National Film Archives began cataloging and restoring the fragments of their work.

Both Ganguly and Painter used their technological and artistic talents to create new content and forms of presentation in their films, while Phalke never outgrew his childlike fascination with mythology. Most 1920s studios preferred the Hollywood model to Phalke's frontal style, actresses mostly being fair Anglo-Indians and their heroes being Parsee.

Mimicry of Hollywood by Indian filmmakers followed from America taking advantage of the Great War's pressure on Britain and their film industry to flood the Indian market. In 1917, as most of the cinemas were showing American and European films, more and more Indian imitations popped up. For example, the Imperial Film Company's *Wild Cat of Bombay* used Sulochana as a female equivalent to Robin Hood. This mimicry may have endured if not for the advent of sound in 1931, which ushered in the "indigenous modern", the defining genre being the "social", remaining dominant until the action genre in the 1970s. Phalke's frontality would persist somewhat in the occasional historical and mythological films, but they and the 1920s Hollywood model would combine and shift to create the Indian "epic melodrama", coined by Ashish Rajadhyaksha in 1993 long after Soviet Russia used the phrase *indiiskie melodramy* to refer to Indian films in general around the first Indian Film Festival in the USSR in 1954.